one of the weaknesses
of materialism is that its critics
are all crazy if you take
a minute right now to search within
youtube
for critique of materialism
or perhaps materialism is wrong you're
going to find
out right lunatics some christian
some hindu some muslim who are
attacking materialism
for reasons that only make sense from
within their religious standpoint like
for you and i right now if we meet a
muslim
who convinces us that materialism is
wrong
that would not convince us to go out and
get
circumcised and start praying to the
muslim version of god there's just
no meaningful connection there there's
no meaningful connection between an
islamic critique of materialism
and the moral authority of the koran
of this particular book so those
criticisms of materialism
they're misguided even from the
religious standpoint
and from a kind of secular atheist
standpoint they're just
complete lunacy they're just pointless
the question is also raised by marxists
and those who in a serious thoroughgoing
way want to criticize what went wrong
with communism
in the last 100 150 years because
materialism took on a greatly expanded
significance in the marxist and
communist
worldview really what this video is
doing
is criticizing that over expansion
of materials now what was it at its core
before it expanded
this ain't something new that just came
out of nowhere materialism was a dogma
in ancient greece and i mean dogma in a
pretty value-neutral sense
i've been to athens greece never been to
ancient greece
i've been to athens in the in the modern
21st century world
you know you can climb up on the top of
a hill
and get a view going all the way down to
the ocean at the perez
you can see the clouds you can see the
whole rain cycle
you can see at a distance the way the
clouds ascend
and descend and the rain falls you can
see thunder and lightning
at a distance where you know you
yourself are dry
there was an awareness although not
scientific
of the rain cycle and there were people
including socrates
who were willing to question why do we
attribute
thunder and lightning to a god like zeus
why do we presume this is outside of the
world of merely
material reality but on the other hand
they didn't have telescopes they didn't
have scientific
experimental equipment they hadn't
discovered electricity or the
laws of magnetism or anything else you
were pretty much
just left in a dogmatic position as a
materialist
of asserting i may not understand
what exactly lightning is and
this is not the only phenomenon in
nature where you really don't
know what it is but nevertheless from my
position of united ignorance
i am going to assert that it's material
this is not something transcendental
this is not something divine
this is not something magical this isn't
an exception
to the rules of material reality that we
have devised
in describing wood
stone steel and water
but if you think about it it's actually
quite difficult to justify
that lightning really is the same
sort of thing as wood
steel and water it's actually quite
difficult
to justify your claim that the moon
or the sun is made of the same
worldly material that you and i
experience here on earth as
would in the middle now today in the
21st century it is
we have a robust scientific tradition to
try to prove that we know what the sun
is made out of and what the moon is made
out of and
what what the moon is made of is not so
different from what the earth is made
out of
the greatest philosophical minds in
ancient india when the buddha was alive
for example
they really couldn't say anything more
than
claiming that the moon was a god not not
that it was controlled by god but that
it was a god
and a lot of people apparently the
majority of people in athens
they really had no explanation for
lightning and just said well that's
that's what zeus does
sometimes they attributed this to the
action or or activity of the god so
materialism started off as a dogma
and in this case the dogma was good the
dogma was useful
it's a dogma sympathize with and support
as our scientific understanding has
expanded more and more that core ancient
notion of materialism
has become less and less dogmatic has
seemed more and more
reasonable or self-evident okay
so what does materialism explain we
started off by saying hey
even if we can't understand the sun and
the moon and lightning
we think or we want to believe we're
committed to this belief
that one way or another it's all it's
material it's
merely material
once you get into a doctrine like
marxism
you're dealing with the assertion that
all kinds of
cultural political changes
result from material conditions this is
the problem is materialism
expanding to have explanatory power
over things that can't really explain
people
perceiving materialism and insisting
dogmatically the materialism
has a cause and effect relationship with
things that are
material but aren't explained by
materials okay
so this is where i have to clarify that
there's a difference
between a precondition and a cause and
effect
relationship right suppose you met
someone
who converted to islam and you asked
them hey
how did you get interested in islam in
the first place how did you first sit
down
and read the quran suppose they tell you
well i needed a pair of glasses
and a lamp then i got the glasses and i
got the lamp and sat down and read the
quran
is not an explanation all right it is an
absolutely necessary material
precondition for this person
that they need to have glasses and a
lamp in order to read something
right it's a necessary precondition
that we have atoms and molecules and
rain and farmers and a
whole complex economy for the french
revolution to happen
and then for the french revolution to
kind of collapse in failure and for
napoleon to take over and the
dictatorship in napoleon
history goes on you can't create
a coherent or meaningful explanation of
what happened in the french revolution
and napoleon's rise to power by looking
at material
conditions not even in the marxist sense
of expanding materialism
to include the relationships between
social classes
the relationships between different
economic abstractions
that they insist are material they don't
accept that those are ideological or
political
concepts right um
the person you were asking about
converting to islam
even if they gave you a less a less
ridiculous answer than indicating that
the glasses or the lamp
explain why they they can produce them
and let's be clear
the glasses and the lamp tell you how
they converted to islam that's how they
read the quran
right they are material preconditions it
is true it's even
in a surreal sense scientifically true
it's a scientifically valid statement
that they used this lamp and this pair
of glasses it's true
but it's profoundly irrelevant right
we might come closer to a easy to
imagine
scenario if you ask someone how did they
first read the koran
and then decide to convert to this
religion
and they gave you the answer that they
were in jail they were in prison
now marxist would have a field date with
this right oh you can read so many
marxist and left-wing analyses
of the material conditions that put
people in prison
and then how they're alienated from you
know this and that and then this leads
to them
adopting the false ideology false
consciousness of the islamic faith
this may be an honest answer that they
say they were in prison
but again really this is just telling us
something about how
they converted to islam it's not a cause
and effect relationship
okay in terms of the seemingly
respectable
scientific doctrine of determinism
a doctrine i completely disagree with
and made other videos criticizing
you can never deal with the laws of
physics and chemistry
with so much thoroughness that it's
going to explain
why this person converted to islam
leaving no remainder
for the realm of human imagination
innovation revery dreams
and decision making right ultimately
with all of the material conditions
haven't been accounted for people make
decisions
and people people may make decisions for
reasons that make no sense at all
they make wildly irrational decisions
we can never explain those decisions
through material conditions and it's in
this sense that materialism
in the marxist sense the the marxist
meaning
and use of materialism overlaps with or
even is
identical to the scientific determinist
physicist's view of materialism in the
21st century and the fundamental problem
is the same
it's the expansion of the doctrine
materialism beyond the limits of what it
can properly uh
describe explain or pertain to
so if i ask you
why do you drink coffee and you give me
a really interesting answer that you
know what
you made a friend when you were
traveling once and this friend of yours
owns a farm in yemen a coffee plantation
in yemen then you start to get
interested in the different conditions
that are needed to grow coffee and how
to make coffee without relying on
pesticides and you got really interested
in you know the rainfall and the soil
conditions and the transportation
and before you knew it you were making a
trip once every six months
back and forth to yemen to meet your
friend and i know you like snorkeling in
yemen there are some other things you do
there on vacation
and every time you bring back this big
bag of
coffee fascinating answer
fascinating and there is a sense
in terms of materialism which you really
have given a scientifically
valid answer not of why you drink coffee
but of how
you drink coffee if if you didn't have
these material conditions
how would you drink coffee how can you
drink coffee without the rainfall and
the sunshine and the soil conditions
and the transportation back and forth to
yemen how
how it's impossible right how are you
going to read the quran and then make
the decision to convert to a new
religion without the lamp in your
reading glasses or without being locked
in prison in
one particular person's case right how
are you going to do it
okay but none of this explains your
decision
and that's what i'm asking about and
most of the time whether it's in our
personal lives our professional lives
our romantic lives
or our political lives what we're
dealing with is human decisions
human decisions that always and
inexorably fall outside of that
materialist worldview
okay you can never explain napoleon's
rise to power materially right you can
never explain
hitler's rise to power materially never
no matter how honest authentic and even
scientifically verifiable
your examination of these different
factors might be
what i want to know about is how and why
you made the decision with all the
side effects of a caffeine
addiction in your life knowing about
advantages and disadvantages to your
health
the way it changes your mood and so on
what i don't know is why do
you make the decision to drink coffee
rather than not at all why did you
decide to drink this
rather than to refuse when did you when
did you first get a customer coffee did
you ever try
quitting and you know did you have
withdrawal symptoms when you quit these
are the questions i'm
i'm asking right so there is a kind of
category mistake a categorical
error a type of fallacious reasoning
that materialism in all its forms
conditions people to accept right now
true skepticism and nihilism
are actually incompatible with
materialism the position of a true
skeptic is to climb up that same hill
in athens and look down at that view to
the ocean
by the perez and see the clouds and see
the lightning and say
you know what that is i don't
i don't know i can't tell you that
lightning is made out of the same stuff
as wood and steel i can't tell you
that the clouds are made out of droplets
of water
that clouds are the same substance as
the water in the ocean
that's kind of mind-boggling we have no
evidence this is ancient athens we're
not able to go up in a crane and take a
sample of the clouds or something we're
not able to fly up there
and everything is to say no no there are
some things i know
and there are some things i just don't
know the madness of materialism whether
it's in its marxist form
or in its supposedly respectable
scientific form that leads people to
reject the belief in free will and
believe in determinism and construct
these bizarre fantasies
about the big bang the big bang theory
and the creation of the universe
and how every detail of your private
life today can be traced back to a cause
and effect
chain going back to the creation of the
universe you know
fundamentally you don't have that
detachment
that strength that true skepticism
requires and that true nihilism
requires to take a step back and say hey
there are some things here
i just don't know
the sphere of human motivations human
innovation
human imagination and decision making
right
that thing that happens when you're
presented with two options
you say you know what i don't like
either one of these options i'm gonna
sit down and come up with one that's
completely new
i'm gonna come up with option three that
thing that happens
when someone maybe someone like napoleon
maybe someone like adolf hitler
just has a dream has a dream there's no
more valid
than any religious leaders dream and
they just go out and start giving
lectures and see
who wants to dream along with them and
they start to change
history whether you view materialism in
a marxist sense or in a more
respectable scientific sense you can
never
never ever explain these phenomena
these political phenomena these
phenomena that involve human passions
human desires human emotions
human innovation human imagination and
ultimately
human decision making you can never
explain them
through materialism